We are in the office of Nestor Valencia, the
planning director for El Paso. Nestor has taken
time off to visit with us during his leave, for
which I wish to thank him. And I have a list of
questions here, Nestor, that we might want to
follow. To the best of your ability, what do you
remember was the first time that legislative
authorization for planning occurred in El Paso?
Well, I think we need to go back to the George
Kessler period, and the exact date of
authorization for legislation for planning in El
Paso is, I don't know. We can look it up. Planning in
El Paso has a long history.
It is undoubtedly a pioneer in the state of Texas
that El Paso had planning long before any other
city in Texas ever thought of having city
planning. We have to get a date on it. Well, yeah,
we're going to get some dates. And it was a sort of a
quirk of luck at somebody's expense of health,
because as you remember, there's a Mr. George
Kessler involved, who was a final architect. He
was immigrated, I think, from Germany to the
United States at an early age, and became one of the
most prominent planner-architects in the United
States, I'd say, between the period of 1890 to
1920.
Mr. Kessler is He is an author of many city planning
documents in the United States,
and he worked out of St. Louis. As I remember,
Jonathan Cunningham had his plan reproduced on
the anniversary of the 1925 plan for El Paso. We
were fortunate to find I would say about 50 or 60
copies of the original Kessler plant in the old
city hall attic when the building was demolished.
So they were perfectly well preserved and intact
and in their own pocket envelopes. So they were in
exceptional shape. People bagged this with...
They were found about 1960. And they were complete
comprehensive plans that had come off the print
shop but had never ever been touched or used. Is
there any chance of getting one of those for
archives?
Probably not the original. The original,
unfortunately, the 40 or 50 originals were very
poorly handled in that everybody was, not
everybody, but people began to get copies and
copies and they were distributed.
Unfortunately, they should have been kept for
planning purposes. I have an original copy in my
office which is, you know, belongs to the plan. I
have reproduced the plan, I've republished it, a
hundred copies
of it, which is certainly not the same quality as
the original, but nonetheless it's a Oh, it's an
effort to perpetuate the original Kessler plan or
the 1925 plan in the city. But you can certainly,
you're welcome to one of the copies that we have
reproduced. But Kessler was sent to a place by his
doctors to a drug client. He was in ill health. And
he had visited El Paso from time to time and had
encouraged friends in the community to begin
looking at El Paso for the possibility of
developing a master plan. He encouraged a few
friends and there were probably two reasons for
Kessler to encourage his friends. would like to be
the consultant for El Paso at that time. And
secondly, he felt the professional need that a
city like El Paso should have a master plan,
regardless of whether he got hired or not. I think
Kessler was of the vintage whose primary concern
was that the city could get a master plan underway
and adopted by a mayor and council. So what
happened was a combination of both. Mr. Kessler
was was hired as a consultant and Mr. Kessler
engineered the first city plant for El Paso. He
must have been hired around 1923 or 1924. He was
hired There was a city plant commission
established in El Paso in 1919. And I think Kessler
had already visited El Paso prior
to that. But at any rate, between 1919 and 1924,
Kessler's major efforts were made to develop the
master plant. Just before he finished his plan, he
died. And so the city engineer, Walter E.
Stockwell, Walter E. Stockwell was the key person
to carry on all of Kessler's work through to
completion, publish the plan, and get it adopted
by the mayor's council as the official plan for the
city. Walter E. Stockwell picked it up from that
point, I would say in 1824-25,
a superior person who was the
city plan engineer. Down 1924 all the way up to
probably 1952. Is that right? It's a long tenure,
yeah.
He was an interesting person because he was
planner-engineer. Well, it's not unusual in the
United States to have a plant arrangement as a
combination of foliage and planting efforts. But
I think Walter was more of a planter at heart in that
by 1930, well,
the Plant Commission was already in operation,
say, during the decade of the 20s, a lot of the
decade. There is also a Robert G. Report, which is a
capital improvement program. It's, I recall,
headed by the Planning
Commission in the 20s. Some cities are just
getting around to doing that now. And we had
official zoning adopted by the city in 1830. So our
first official zoning map, our first official...
zoning ordinances were in 1930. That was my next
question. So, and right after Stockwell came, I
fell off. I had a hard time in the 50s in that my
recollection of planning was Kessler,
Stockwell, and then after Stockwell came, Wingo.
How do you spell it? Just Wingo. W-I-N-G-O.
Go ahead. So after it was Wingo in the 50s, and then
you were a little sketchy, you thought. Well, I
think after Wingo,
John Cunningham came and took over. So that's...
You don't remember the year of that? 1958. 1958,
John came in, no, Cunningham came in 1957.
Probably about November of 57.
So I don't recall knowing of any other director of
planning other than Wingle. And then you took over
in 1980. How
would you say that your style of directorship
differs from Jonathan's?
That's a very difficult question. It really is
because
John Cunningham's
career in planning
parallels mine in no question. John was here a few
months I moved here and assumed the directorship
of planning back in 57, and I was the first person he
hired after he came to El Paso. Of course, there was
a lot of difference. John was a director and I was a
junior planning aide or some beginning slot in the
planning department, but I was very fortunate to
be with Mr. Cunningham throughout his career in
planning in El Paso. There were only two of you
initially? In planning? No. We had a staff of, back
then we had probably a staff of about 22. When he got
here. Which was a very comfortable staff for the
size of the city and the complexity of the job back
then. John came here
probably in November of 1957, and I came on board in
February of 1958, just a few months after he got
here. I was willing to relate that the difference
is that he was already a professional planner,
director, who had been in Spokane working, I
believe he was director of planning, and had
headed the Puget Sound Council of Governments.
So, I am I interned with John Cunningham. My first
ten years was working with Cunningham and then we,
since the time that I started
There was only one year from 1969 to 1970 that I was
away doing work for the Council of Governments.
Then back in 71 and 72, I was away in Costa Rica doing
work. And back in 19... What sort of thing did you do
in Costa Rica? City and regional planning,
consulting work for
the government of Costa Rica. The federal
government of Costa Rica. Yeah. But I was also
assistant director of planning for the city of El
Paso in between...
Somewhere in 1970, I was assistant director of
planning for a while. Then I became urban
coordinator
between 72 and 73. And between 73
and 75, I was away from the office because I was
assistant director. executive assistant to
Mayor Hervey. From 75 to 77, I was assistant to Don
Henderson. And then from 77 to 1980, I was... Don
Henderson was ex-mayor, ex-pro. And then between
1977 and 1980, I was director of federal branch for
the city. Pardon me. And then 1980, I took over the
planet. So it's kind of been sporadic, but in the
same general area. Mm-hmm. One question, though.
To answer the question of, you know, the style of
being . It's
difficult to answer because At least for ten solid
years, we worked very closely. I worked very
closely with Cunningham. And for the next
additional seven or eight years, we were in
constant communication with local government.
His style of planning was very i would say very
classical it's a classical type of planning very
strong on the principles in planning city
planning very articulate man before the mayor
council who was able to to defend
planning's positioning not necessarily on
feeling or on the politics of the day, but on true
professional framework. Yeah. I think John
Cunningham and I have the same approach to
planning. We feel that planning is more than just
the physical development of a plan. We happen to
both think that planning in any city,
specifically in El Paso, is more of a policy
recommending department and not necessarily a
line department.
Planning should be closely related to the office
of the mayor and there should be a considerable
amount of interchange between the mayor and the
department of planning. John felt very strong
about this. He felt that of all of the departments
in the city, planning was the focal point for for
policy formulation and to give direction to the
mayor and city council on matters which involve
the community as opposed to being a process, a
processing network, a machine that would process
subdivisions and so on. I feel very strongly about
that. I think
engineering has its place, public works has its
place, building inspection, traffic and
transportation, and the very nature of planning
puts planning in perhaps a more advantageous
position over these other departments in terms of
a global or a comprehensive view of the city or
understanding
of the city. Going back to comprehensive
planning,
El Paso has a long history of comprehensive
citywide planning. And I'm wondering, is there
any specific periodic review of El Paso's
comprehensive plan? Does it occur annually or
every five years or anything of that nature? We try
to keep on a five to seven year revisit of the master
plan. We are right now in the process of are
upgrading our plan this year and next year. It's
been about five years and five or six years now, so
we are setting aside some monies for consulting
work, some monies this year and next year, both
local funds and community development funds to
upgrade our plan. We're looking at it
differently. We want to emphasize more or less a
strategy plan rather than a 20-year company plan.
Who will be doing that work? Well, planning. The
Department of Planning is going to have to find
time and ways and means of allowing some of the
people internally to get out of the fast lanes and
work on the plan 100%.
If I had 100 people instead of 40 or such,
we could still be on the fast track, every one of us.
by just simply doing work that is either required,
requested, or needed, which we have done. There's
two or three baskets, that which we would like to
do, that which
needs to be done, and that which is necessary to do
now. for political reasons, for
the issues of the day, your priorities are
sometimes set for you. So there are three or four
flavors of projects that we can get involved in.
And one of them is find enough time to do a company's
plan. Of course, we're going to get some money,
$100,000 for consulting. I see. You will have
outside consultants. Oh, yeah. There's no way
that we can do it internally. And even at that, even
with the small amount of money that we're going to
assemble, and with all the effort that we can
muster internally, it's going to be a very skimpy
revamp from this point. I realize that. You know,
planning, as I was saying, planning in El Paso is no
different from other parts of the United States
and proud. The only difference is that we have a
longer history in planning than most cities. One
of the things that you find different in El Paso
from other cities, and maybe not strikingly
different in Texas, but certainly throughout the
United States, is the fact that we don't have urban
renewal. never had it and we probably won't have it
where eminent domain plays a big role in
redevelopment. Voters defeated that twice
already and I don't think that there stands a
chance to put it on the ballot again for the next 50
years. That's political
normal. So While other cities throughout the
United States were going through urban renewal
process in the late 50s and early 60s, El Paso was
sort of a by itself city doing what it could in the
planning process without any federal assistance
whatsoever. It was not until the good old 701 came
through that that we got any federal assistance
planning. Prior to that, it was a relatively
simple process of planning the neighborhood,
classic neighborhood planning, the classic
master plan, the classic land use, with little or
no federal funding or interference or
involvement. As time went on and and community
development came into play and revenue sharing
and we went public transit and we were beginning to
get more and more federal involvement, the
planning process became more complex. We now have
to, you know, coordinate a lot of the issues with
other agencies, which is good. The Highway
Department,
Community Development, HUD. And now it is more, it
is not, it has become a little more complex because
of of the natural things that have occurred
throughout the United States. The council of
governments prior to 1965 didn't exist in any way.
The regional councils of government, then the
camps program came to be, and which evolved into
something else. Well, at any rate, the council
government's movement in El Paso began in 1965.
And so, you know, other issues such as the Chamizal
settlement had, I think, a very significant
impact on the planning of El Paso. For one thing,
the Chamizal settlement brought about enough
federal assistance to update our master plan.
That was one of the byproducts of the
international treaty between the United States
and Mexico, and we got some money to upgrade our
plan. And we did. Do you remember how much it was?
I'm going to guess, but I think it was about
$200,000. which then was a whole lot of money. Oh
yeah, sure. Big bucks. But
the Chummy's Isle was probably the biggest impact
in terms of, you know, the planning process.
Tax increment financing, is important, although
very recent. We now have a tax-included financing
district.
That's about it.
I think we have a viable zoning ordinance. We have a
viable subdivision processing system. We have
ETJ jurisdiction. We
wish the heck we had more enforcement of zoning and
subdivision activity, but we don't. But that's
being here
and there. I think the city has
enjoyed some very excellent support by previous
administrations. in mayors and councils, but
would you care to point out any individuals by
name? Sure. Peter DeWitter, 69, 69-71.
Judson Williams, very strong mayor and very
strong supporter of planning, 63 to probably 69.
Raymond Theus was a very strong supporter and is
still a very strong supporter of city planning.
How did he spell his last name? T-E-L-L-E-S.
Raymond Theus was subsequently an ambassador to
Costa Rica in the United States, and is now living
in El Paso. So we've had Theus, we have had Judson
Williams, Peter DeWetter, We have had Don
Henderson who was a strong supporter of City
Planning. His period was between 75 and 77.
We certainly have had excellent support, super
excellent support by now Mayor Jonathan Rogers
who came into office in Well, he came to us in 1981
and he is a very strong believer and a very strong
believer to uphold the decisions of the city plan
commission. Strongly supports plan commission
decisions at the council level. seldom, and I
don't recall one time that the mayor himself has
ever gone against the workers in the last four
years. That's remarkable. It is. He knows real
estate, he knows development, and he knows about
income. So I think El Paso has enjoyed some
excellent administrations as far as political
support
is concerned. What about the relationship of the
city to state government? Has there been much, in a
way, of benefits from the state or otherwise, from
the point of view of planning? Not really.
other than working very closely with the state
highway department. And there has been some
periods of time that we have worked with the
Governor's Office of Economic Development
related to border conferences and border
regional commissions and that sort of thing. The
state is very much not involved.